_pages/docs/data-string.md, before:

---
layout: single
title: String Datums
permalink: /docs/data-string/
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "docs"
---

An OWL data property can hold a string as a plain literal with an optional language tag (see [here](https://www.w3.org/2007/OWL/wiki/PlainLiteral){:target="_blank"} ). This enables constraints on string length and its contents (by way of regular expressions).  

For example, one could construct the following representation to store and validate international postal codes generally, and the US Zip Code subclass (a string of 5 digits).

<!--
[//]: # (        Class: 'string value specification'        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string)

[//]: # (        subClassOf 'string value specification')
-->

    Class: 'postal code specification'
        subClassOf 'value specification'
        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string[pattern "[0-9A-Za-z \-]{2,10}"]

    Class: 'ZIP code specification'
        subClassOf 'postal code specification'
        subClassOf 'specifies value of' some ('postal code' and 'is about' some (site and 'located in' some 'United States of America')
        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string[pattern "[0-9]{5}"]


String length constraints can be set via "length", "minLength" and "maxLength" parameters, e.g. "xsd:string[length "5"^^xsd:integer].  A "pattern" parameter supports [regular expression](https://www.regular-expressions.info/xml.html){:target="_blank"} syntax to some extent, allowing "[0-9] [a-z] [A-Z] . ? * + {m,n}" components.  Thus we can express fairly well-validated  [email addresses](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000429){:target="_blank"}:

<!--
[//]: # (        subClassOf 'string value specification')
-->

    Class: 'email address specification'
        subClassOf 'value specification'
        subClassOf 'specifies value of' only 'email address' 
        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string[pattern "[A-Za-z0-9]+([_.\-][A-Za-z0-9]+)*\@[A-Za-z0-9]+([.\-][A-Za-z0-9]+){1,3}"]

Note one quirk: In pattern matching, the "@" character must be escaped or else the remainder of test string is ignored (i.e. "@" is interpreted as a language facet addition to the string).  Also more work is required to cover possible validation of [international / UTF-8 strings](https://www.regular-expressions.info/unicode.html){:target="_blank"}.

Commit message:

categorical john sex example, numeric edit.

_pages/docs/data-string.md, after:

---
layout: single
title: String Datums
permalink: /docs/data-string/
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "docs"
---

"Free text" string data are often not amenable to data analysis by OWL reasoning unless the values happen to be categorical (see categorical data section).  Textual identifiers that act as keys to unify records can be useful - these might include health care identifiers, postal codes, or the scientific names of plants and animals. The following detail mainly pertains to validating strings that operate as keys having a partiuclar format which should encourage data standardization. 

An OWL data property can hold a string as a plain literal with an optional language tag (see [here](https://www.w3.org/2007/OWL/wiki/PlainLiteral){:target="_blank"} ). This also allows constraints on string length and its contents (by way of regular expressions).  For example, one can construct the following representation to store and validate international postal codes generally, and the US Zip Code subclass (a string of 5 digits).

<!--
[//]: # (        Class: 'string value specification'        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string)

[//]: # (        subClassOf 'string value specification')
-->

    Class: 'postal code specification'
        subClassOf 'value specification'
        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string[pattern "[0-9A-Za-z \-]{2,10}"]

    Class: 'ZIP code specification'
        subClassOf 'postal code specification'
        subClassOf 'specifies value of' some ('postal code' and 'is about' some (site and 'located in' some 'United States of America')
        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string[pattern "[0-9]{5}"]


String length constraints can be set via "length", "minLength" and "maxLength" parameters, e.g. "xsd:string[length "5"^^xsd:integer].  A "pattern" parameter supports [regular expression](https://www.regular-expressions.info/xml.html){:target="_blank"} syntax to some extent, allowing "[0-9] [a-z] [A-Z] . ? * + {m,n}" components.  Thus we can express fairly well-validated  [email addresses](http://purl.obolibrary.org/obo/IAO_0000429){:target="_blank"}:

<!--
[//]: # (        subClassOf 'string value specification')
-->

    Class: 'email address specification'
        subClassOf 'value specification'
        subClassOf 'specifies value of' only 'email address' 
        subClassOf 'has specified value' only xsd:string[pattern "[A-Za-z0-9]+([_.\-][A-Za-z0-9]+)*\@[A-Za-z0-9]+([.\-][A-Za-z0-9]+){1,3}"]

Note one quirk: In pattern matching, the "@" character must be escaped or else the remainder of test string is ignored (i.e. "@" is interpreted as a language facet addition to the string).  Also more work is required to cover possible validation of [international / UTF-8 strings](https://www.regular-expressions.info/unicode.html){:target="_blank"}.
